Let me start the story like this: I strongly believe that Active Inference is the perfect match for thermodynamic hardware – both together could enable efficient intelligent reasoning directly in hardware.

As is widely accepted, traditional computing hardware is not very well suited for AI workloads. AI is all about handling probabilities and uncertainties. Strikingly, usual digital chips are designed to prevent stochastic behavior – i.e., noise. Then, we do something not so smart – we use exactly these kinds of chips to simulate stochasticity, i.e., AI workloads. On extension, this consumes enormous amounts of energy, just because the chip is not well suited for the workload. 

A really profound remedy for this issue might come from thermodynamic chip designs that rather embrace stochasticity instead of fighting it. These designs seem to offer the building blocks to allow for intelligent processing directly in hardware. Still, it appears to be somewhat undecided how to assemble these building blocks in a way that supports the emergence of "intelligence".

"Intelligence" per se is sometimes a rather vague expression. My understanding of it is as follows: Something is able to perceive, plan, act, and learn to resist chaotic environmental influences (entropy) and thus survives. It achieves this, because it understands how the environment works (it has a generative model) and uses this information to either adapt or act on the environment to receive less harmful observations.

This little definition is exactly where the Free Energy Principle and its algorithmic perspective Active Inference comes into play. It frames perception, planning, action, and learning as a unified inference process based on free energy minimization thereby handling arbitrary uncertainties where they occur.

An Active Inference model is usually expressed via factor graphs that support local belief propagation via message passing. This exact graphical structure that supports local computations might be THE blueprint for thermodynamic chip designs. Equivallently to how Active Inference agents minimize their free energy, the dynamics within the chip could just relax towards a stable state. This physical relaxation process implements the unified inference process on which all intelligent mechanisms are based on. Please see my little demonstration of an Active Infernce agent based on a factor graph to understand how perception, planning, and action all arises from a unified free energy minimization process: https://active-inference-demonstration.streamlit.app.

(The development of certain Active Inference agents is part of my Masterthesis in Computational Neuroscience – please see the branch "thesis_wip" for all related code.)